
We missed you! I hope you get fixed soon.

I made the arroz con gandules again tonight with regular peas, and it was just as good. I couldn’t find aji dulce peppers. Looks a lot more complicated than it is, now that I have the hang of it. It came out very salty the first time, so I cut back a little on the adobo and the sazon.  

     

    For the Puerto Rican Sofrito:
        1 medium yellow onion, cut into chunks
        1/2 pepper green bell pepper, cleaned and chopped
        1/2 pepper red bell pepper, cleaned and chopped
        6 large garlic cloves
        1 cup packed cilantro, roughly chopped
        3 green onions, trimmed and chopped
        2 ají dulce peppers (optional)
        1/4 cup packed culantro (optional)
        Large pinch sazón seasoning

    For the Arroz con Gandules:
        2 tablespoons neutral cooking oil, like grapeseed or canola oil
        1/2 cup smoked ham steak, diced
        1/4 cup fresh sofrito (see provided recipe)
        2 tablespoons diced pimento peppers, drained
        2 tablespoons capers, drained 
        2 teaspoons sazón spice blend 
        1 teaspoon adobo spice blend 
        1 chicken bouillon cube, crumbled
        1 large bay leaf
        One 15-ounce can green pigeon peas, drained and liquid reserved 
        1 cup jasmine or long-grain rice, rinsed and drained
        Water, enough for 1 1/2 cups total
        Kosher salt, to taste
        Cracked black pepper, to taste
        Fresh or frozen banana leaf, for steaming (optional)

    Directions
        For the Sofrito: In a food processor or blender, combine all of the ingredients together and pulse, adding 1 to 2 tablespoons of water if needed to create sauce, similar to pesto or salsa. Refrigerate for up to 5 days or portion into ice cube trays or containers and freeze for up to 6 months.
        In a medium-sized pot or Dutch oven, over medium heat, add 2 tablespoons neutral cooking oil. Once hot and shimmering, add the 1/2 cup smoked ham cubes and cook until crisp around the edges, about 7-10 minutes, stirring often.
        Next, add the ¼ cup fresh sofrito, 2 tablespoons diced pimento peppers, 2 tablespoons capers, 2 teaspoons sazón spice blend, 1 teaspoon adobo spice blend, 1 crumbled chicken bouillon cube, and 1 large bay leaf. Stir well to combine everything and cook until the sofrito is fragrant, about 3 minutes.
        Add the drained pigeon peas and stir. Cook the peas with the ham and sofrito mixture for 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Then, add 1 cup rinsed and drained rice, stirring to toast the rice and make sure all the grains are evenly coated with the seasoned pea mixture for another 5 minutes.
        Once the rice is toasted, add the water and the reserved pigeon pea liquid. Taste and adjust seasoning with kosher salt and black pepper to your liking.
        When the rice and liquid are both rapidly boiling and the water has mostly evaporated (you should see little bubble pockets in the pot), turn the heat down to low, stir the rice to fold it over on itself, cover the rice with the banana leaf, cover the pot with a tight-fitting lid, and let the rice steam for 20 minutes.
        Once your timer is done, fluff the rice using a fork and serve immediately with sliced ripe avocado and tostones (twice-fried plantains).

     

    Made on Christmas, 2025. Delicious. Followed recipe exactly except used Better than Bouillion. Salty, but delicious (I didn't add salt.)


> On Dec 27, 2025, at 2:39 PM, Ed Keith <e_d_k@yahoo.com> wrote:
>
> Sorry I did not make it. I had some of the leftovers Julia brought home.  The rice was vary good. Could I get the recipe?
> -EdK

